The Role for Signaling Theory and Receiver Psychology in Marketing Bria Dunham Abstract Within marketing contexts, messages are effective when consumers find them both believable and relevant. An understanding of signaling theory and signal design features, derived from the study of animal and human behavioral ecology, can help marketers overcome the first challenge of crafting believable signals. Effective signals must fundamentally overcome the skepticism of receivers and generally accomplish this by linkage, either through identity or costliness, to the underlying quality being signaled. An understanding of receiver psychology, which involves appeals based on innate preferences that derive from shared human evolutionary history, can help marketers overcome the second challenge of render- ing signals attractive and meaningful to consumers. Sensory bias, sexual stimuli, neoteny, and status all offer ripe opportunities for marketers to appeal to the innate preferences of consumers broadly or to specific targeted demographics. The fol- lowing chapter provides an overview of signaling theory and receiver psychology as grounded in the evolutionary disciplines, with examples and applications that extend to the business world. Keywords Signaling theory  Receiver psychology  Sensory exploitation  Signal cost  Consumer skepticism  Advertising  Marketing 1 Introduction Why are black iPhones sold with white earbuds? There are many possible explana- tions. Perhaps Apple has such a backlog of white earbuds that it was convenient to package them with black iPhones so as to use the existing inventory. Possibly white earbuds are cheaper or easier to produce. Maybe manufacturing black earbuds B. DunhamPublic Health, New York University, 240 Greene Street, 2nd Floor, NY 10003, New York e-mail: bd411@nyu.edu G. Saad (ed.), Evolutionary Psychology in the Business Sciences, 225 DOI 10.1007/978-3-540-92784-6_9, # Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011 226 B. Dunham has never occurred to decision-makers in the Apple product design department. We could develop a number of similar suggestions, but none of these inventory- and production-oriented explanations are particularly convincing: such a large and successful company as Apple surely would consider the possibility of distributing handheld gadgets with matching earphones and would surmount any minor pro- duction and inventory obstacles to do so if matching the earphone color to the color of the device would be a strategic selling point. A more compelling explanation is that white earbuds serve a signaling function, related to the popularity and status associated with the iPod prior to the release of the iPhone. The iPod was initially released in 2001, has generated many different iterations and spin-off versions, and has dominated the market for handheld digital media players. White hardware has become a distinguishing feature of many Apple products. The clean, crisp whiteness of the iPod is a highly conspicuous design feature, as iPods are routinely exhibited on sidewalks, school buses, and subways as their owners make their daily commutes. The distinctive white earbuds, as an extension of the iPod, help reinforce the brand awareness by their visibility even when the music player itself is tucked away in a pocket or bag. Although the design of the headphones has changed several times over the history of the iPod, they have consistently been white, small, and designed to fit inside the ear. When Apple began to offer iPods in different colors, they still came packaged with white earbuds. The iPhone was first released in 2007, following a massive marketing and media blitz. Upon the release of the iPhone, consumers were already largely familiar with the similar iPod as both an entertainment device and marker of status; the iPhone release may have “piggybacked” on this consumer familiarity. All iPhone models to date have been available in black casings; some models have also been available in white. By including the iconic white earbuds with each iPhone purchase regardless of the device color, Apple facilitates their customers’ conspicuous status display and thus reinforces their own brand visibility. Telltale white earbuds indicate to passersby that the bearer ascribes to certain notions of coolness and style, engages willingly in some degree of conspicuous consumption, has the necessary resource control to afford a portable Apple device (and the accompanying service plan, in the case of the iPhone itself), and presumably enjoys music. That’s a lot of information content for less than an ounce of plastic and wire. The black iPhone-white earbud phenomenon fits into a broader framework of signaling theory, which itself is informed by theoretical biology. The swell of evolutionary thought in fields relating to human behavior, from medicine to eco- nomics to law, can also equip businesses with targeted insights into consumer psychology and desires. Graduate study in business, however, largely omits these insights, leading to the argument that much of marketing and consumer behavior research is antibiological in nature (Miller 2009; Saad 2007, 2008; Saad and Gill 2000). Database and index searches for signaling theory terminology, or key terms from evolutionary psychology, in business sources provide scant results. Miller (2009) surveyed the three main journals in marketing—Journal of Marketing, Journal of Marketing Research, and Journal of Consumer Research—noting that although a small number of papers addressed how signaling theory can be used to The Role for Signaling Theory and Receiver Psychology in Marketing 227 communicate information about a company’s traits to consumers, no results addressed how consumption could communicate information about purchasers’ traits to other people. Saad (2006) noted that Journal of Consumer Research abstracts for a 28-year period yielded only one result for “biology”, one for “evolutionary psychology”, and none for “Darwin”. It is safe to assume that evolutionary approaches have been underutilized thus far in consumer behavior research and marketing, thus suggesting that the field is ripe for new evolutionary insights. This chapter provides a crash course in signaling theory and reviews the extant literature on its use and usefulness in marketing, advertising, and other business disciplines. In particular, this article will address signals, cues, and indices as packets of information transmission from producers or marketers to consumers; will delineate the uses and limitations of signaling theory within marketing; and will discuss appeals to the evolved receiver psychology of consumers. Biological signaling theory is based in the study of animal behavior. Human behavioral ecologists and evolutionary psychologists have taken this framework and applied signaling theory to understanding human interactions from an evolu- tionary perspective (Cronk 2005; Iredale et al. 2008; Smith and Bliege Bird 2000). Some of applications of signaling theory to contemporary human behavior have direct relevance to economic transactions (e.g., Miller 2009). However, most references to signaling theory in business contexts refer to economic signaling, which differs from signaling theory as used by biologists, ethologists, and human behavioral ecologists. Economic signaling theory focuses on what business scholars consider costly signals of quality (e.g., Dawar and Sarvary 1997; Cai et al. 2002), but does not integrate an evolutionary perspective or investigate how the signal itself has evolved over time due to receiver feedback loops. Both long- and short- term marketing strategies can profit from an understanding of how signal design can overcome consumer skepticism and how certain types of signals can appeal to consumers’ evolved preferences. Economic signaling theory focuses on costliness in a purely financial sense whereas biological signaling theory considers the cost of signal production and maintenance in terms of survival and reproductive success. While “cost” may seem intuitively financial in business contexts, it is important to distinguish costliness in the evolutionary sense from the property of being expensive. Financial cost can be evolutionarily costly, but only when the cost is so high as to present a real and imminent threat to the survival of the business in the case of dishonest signaling or where the cost is so truly prohibitive that it would be impossible, not merely inadvisable, to signal falsely. Adopting this evolutionary approach to costly signal- ing, rather than the conventional business model that costly signals are those that are financially expensive, may elucidate the important role that signaling can play between different parties engaged in business enterprises. Within the business disciplines, marketing is an intuitive arena for the applica- tion of signaling theory. In fact, biologists, anthropologists, and psychologists working from a signaling theoretical perspective have long co-opted marketing terminology in discussing the signals that people and other organisms send to each other. A peacock’s tail or a man’s facial symmetry are spoken of as “advertisements” 228 B. Dunham of their quality as mates, as are elements of the external environment under the domain of the organism, such as a bowerbird’s bower or lawyer’s flashy sports car. These latter elements are part of what Dawkins terms “the extended phenotype” (1982) and may be most instructive for examining the utility and disutility of conspicuous consumption for mate-seekers. Recent substantial work on the evolu- tion of consumer behavior has already incorporated insights from signaling theory (e.g., Griskevicius et al. 2010; Miller 2009; Saad 2007; Saad and Vongas 2009) and sex differences in evolved preferences and neurobiology (e.g., Pace 2009). Market- ers can use the notion of the extended phenotype and knowledge about evolved preferences to guide product promotion efforts that appeal to consumers’ own signaling motivations. Despite laws regulating truth in advertising, marketing is not readily believed to be honest, as the field’s objective is to present a positive impression of a product in order to increase sales and generate a profit for the company in question, both in short- and long-term contexts. Indeed, consumers are skeptical even after positive verification of advertising claims that appear too good to be true, which suggests that consumer skepticism may be an adaptive response to dishonesty in advertising (Koslow 2000). An examination of signal forms and routes to signal reliability may assist marketers in determining which types of signaling are appropriate and efficient for their particular aims. 2 The Basics of Signaling Theory From an evolutionary psychological perspective, the first challenge in marketing is to render an advertisement, brand, or other marketing device as believable in the hopes of transforming audience members into actual consumers of the marketed good or service. Examining the different routes to signal reliability within biological systems provides a framework for identifying the opportunities to boost either actual signal reliability or the consumers’ perceptions of signal reli- ability. This approach can also identify the limitations of classic biological signal- ing theory in marketing and can illuminate opportunities to use signals to appeal directly to different aspects of receiver psychology. Signaling theory investigates the transmission of information from one indi- vidual, called a sender, to another individual, called a receiver. Biologists, human behavioral ecologists, and evolutionary psychologists attempt to explain signaling theory using an evolutionary framework, while economists and marketers apply signaling theory to patterns within commerce and business. These approaches are not as disparate as they may at first seem. An evolutionary perspective could equip marketers and economists to better understand signal design while an under- standing of signaling within the business world could aid biologists in contextual- izing and explaining their research to broader audiences. A signal is any physical or behavioral trait of an individual that has evolved to influence the behavior of others, The Role for Signaling Theory and Receiver Psychology in Marketing 229 and which is effective because the receiver’s response has also been shaped by selection (Maynard Smith and Harper 2003). These signals convey information about the sender’s characteristics (e.g., Zahavi 1975) or decrease the receiver’s uncertainty regarding the sender’s own future behavior (Krebs and Dawkins 1984). Signaling theory is essentially about communication in a very broad sense; indeed, it is the dominant theoretical perspective within the scientific study of animal communication. According to classic biological signaling theory, signals are designed by selection and produced by a sender to meet a specific need. Applying signaling theory outside of biological phenomena demonstrates that evolution is not the only signal designer. Humans, including marketing profes- sionals, design many signals for personal and professional uses disconnected from biological evolution. Basic principles of signaling theory are instructive for under- standing effective and efficient signal design and routes to signal reliability, regard- less of whether the signals are designed by evolution or by people. As people are themselves designed by evolution, one should expect that man-made signals should largely congrue with Darwinian realities. Signal transmission depends not only upon a sender and a message sent, but also upon a receiver whose understanding of the world is such that the signal can be properly interpreted to evoke the appropriate response. The conspicuousness of a signal, the degree to which it is stereotyped, redundant features, and alerting characteristics all enhance the likelihood that a receiver will detect a signal (Wiley 1983). Signaling happens when one individual has information that a second individual does not, and where the sending organism benefits from producing the signal due to its effect on the receiver. Often the receiver benefits from this information as well. Krebs and Dawkins (1984) cast senders as manipulators, who alter the behavior of others to their own advantage, and receivers as mind- readers, who anticipate signalers’ future behavior and react accordingly. Within a business context, marketers are manipulators who transmit advertisements to entice consumers to buy goods and services, and those same consumers are mind-readers that interpret the actual utility of the product for their particular circumstances, although they may be persuaded by the content and style of the advertisement, or signal, itself. Signals, in an evolutionary sense, are not arbitrary. Honest signals contain a link to the underlying attribute being communicated, generally either by an inherent and unfakeable connection to the quality being signaled or by costliness; an awareness of this link can be useful in guiding current and future interactions between individuals. However, not all signals are honest. Under certain circum- stances, senders may benefit from manipulating the behavior of receivers by use of dishonest signaling, even when this manipulation is not in the best interest of receivers. Systems can be evolutionarily stable in the presence of dishonest signaling so long as signals are honest on average (Johnstone and Grafen 1993; Kokko 1997). As such, routes to signal reliability and anti-deception strategies are important topics within theoretical and empirical investigation of signaling phenomena. 230 B. Dunham 3 Different Routes to Signal Reliability Any signal must necessarily overcome the skepticism of receivers in order for the sender to accrue the benefit of its production. One way of overcoming receiver skepticism relies on the design of the signal itself and the reasons why that signal may be perceived as honest. Reliability can be ensured by any of three central criteria: (1) where production of the signal would be prohibitively costly for a sender of low quality; (2) where the sender would not gain from falsely producing the signal, even if the signal were cost-free, particularly where the sender and receiver have a common interest; and (3) where the signal cannot be faked (Maynard Smith and Harper 2003). In addition to these three routes to signal reliability, signals may also be honest due to high punishment costs or reputational effects in social species, including humans (Maynard Smith and Harper 2003). Further explanation and evolutionary examples of routes to signal reliability follow, divided into signal forms whose reliability is contingent upon cost and signal forms whose reliability is based on the intrinsic link between signal and the underlying quality. 3.1 Costliness Much discussion of the honesty or reliability of signals revolves around costly signaling. Cost in the signaling sense generally does not mean financial costliness, although there are some exceptions; rather, it refers to a mixture of strategic and efficacy costs involved in the production and transmission of the signal (Krebs and Dawkins 1984). Efficacy costs are the baseline costs necessary to ensure that the signal may be reliably perceived and interpreted. In contrast, strategic costs, such as the increased predation risk for a peacock due to his lovely but cumbersome tail or the increased burden to immune response in a man with high testosterone, are prohibitive for the sender; these are generally the costs entailed when researchers refer to “costly” signals. The presence of strategic costs in a signaling system increases, but does not completely ensure, honesty because the cost to a dishonest signaler is higher than the benefit, either due to a reduction in bodily resources for somatic needs or an increased vulnerability to parasites, pathogens, and predators. Essentially, the presence of costs that would be too dear for a signaler of low quality to produce assures the receiver of the signal’s veracity due to the prohibitive nature of the cost. A discussion of efficacy costs in marketing may be broached by reference to media saturation. The average consumer is exposed to over 60,000 words from the mass media daily, including such a bulk of advertisements that consumers will often disregard nearly all information received due to the impossibility to cognitively process so many stimuli (Herbig and Kramer 1994). As businesses have a vested interest in inducing consumers to perceive, process, and retain advertising messages about their products, it is useful to examine the design features that ensure this transmission and retention. In terms of signal design features, detectability and The Role for Signaling Theory and Receiver Psychology in Marketing 231 discriminability both rely on efficacy costs, as an efficacy cost is simply the minimal expenditure for effective transmission. A receiver’s ability to perceive a stimulus and distinguish it from its surroundings is essential for that signal’s transmission. An example of a particularly detectable and discriminable advertisement is the iconic large Citgo advertisement in Boston’s Kenmore Square, which is far more attention- grabbing than the myriad conventional billboards in the area. Memorability, in contrast, derives from the salience of the stimulus and is not ensured by attempts to make that signal more detectable or discriminable. Strategic costs may contribute to memorability, but so do all other features of signal design that increase conspicu- ousness or significance to the receiver (Guilford and Dawkins 1991). Marketing has many routes to signal memorability: association with familiar cultural touchstones or persons, distinctive and ubiquitous logos that appeal to the senses, and so forth. Discordance can also enhance the memorability of an advertising message: com- mercials for the sandwich franchise Quiznos, for example, feature eccentric mascots with incongruent physiques, such as “Baby Bob”, a talking baby with an oversized head, and the “spongmonkeys”, two prosimian primates with oversized human facial features who sing that they “love the subs”. The “spongmonkeys” in particular have precipitated an unprecedented amount of viewer and consumer mail to Quiznos’s corporate office (Stevenson 2004). Trey Hall, Chief Marketing Officer for Quiznos, reports that the “spongmonkey ads” were launched to increase consumer awareness of the brand through being “dramatic” with a limited advertising budget; this goal is largely considered to have been met (Stevenson 2004). Memorability may be the most significant of the three efficacy costs for classical advertising aims, but detectability and discriminability should also be considered, particularly in light of advertising clutter (Pieters et al. 2007; Rotfield 2006). The classic example of a heavy strategic cost is a handicap signal. Handicaps are the flashy stars of signaling theory: showy exhibitions of quality that weaken the sender by virtue of their cost. For example, a large tail both requires valuable somatic resources and encumbers a peacock’s ability to evade predators. Zahavi (1975) proposed that these extravagances are signals to peahens, which could use the tail as a reliable signal of the peacock’s health or genetic quality. Such an imposing cost would make faking the signal prohibitively costly, thus ensuring signal honesty. Handicaps are generally considered to be an extreme form of costly signaling. Other costly signals in nonhuman species include food and alarm calls, as the caller incurs an increased predation risk or reduces his own access to a resource in order to warn group members of danger or call individuals to share in a food source. The specific signaling function varies dramatically by species, with some examples best explained by reference to kin selection and some that seem to represent an increased status effect for the caller or increased observed ownership of a portion of the shared resource (Searcy and Nowicki 2005). As a human example, Meriam islanders use turtle hunting as a costly signal of male fitness and resource control, which varies by the specific role undertaken in the hunt and the type of expedition (Smith and Bliege Bird 2000, 2003; Smith et al. 2003). With costly and handicap signals, individuals who are of insufficient quality to signal a feature would find it very difficult to convincingly do so, as such signaling demands 232 B. Dunham greater metabolic resources than the sender has in reserve or because the deficiency would be obvious to receivers. In humans, muscularity may serve as a handicap signal of physical strength, particularly weightlifting ability. Further, some degree of male muscularity is considered attractive in both heterosexual (Frederick and Haselton 2007) and homosexual (Swami and Tove??e 2008) contexts, rendering it adaptively relevant to observers, although individual preferences vary. Increased muscle mass is both the result and the facilitator of regular weightlifting activity. A person’s degree of muscularity does change over time and enacts strategic costs, in terms of somatic resources and opportunity costs of time spent engaged in athletic activities, to ensure its maintenance (Sugawara et al. 2002). Individuals with lesser weightlifting ability would be unable to develop muscles suggesting considerably greater strength than they possessed, and any attempt to circumvent this system by use of a false signal such as a muscle suit would likely be met by injury or ridicule when the false signaler attempted to lift a heavy load. Even in cases where steroids or other muscle enhancing substances are used to grow bulkier muscles than the individual would have otherwise developed, the muscularity itself still serves as a signal of weightlifting ability but not as a reliable signal of underlying physiology. Existing scholarship on handicap signaling in business journals has conflated the evolutionary notion of costliness with financial costliness (Ambler and Hollier 2004), or with behaviors that do not entail debilitating costs to the signaler (Deutsch Salamon and Deutsch 2006). Although a corporation, firm, or business can be interpreted as an individual signaler in a business context, that entity must with- stand a relevant survival cost in order for a costly signal to be considered reliable. These inquiries do identify relevant signals in business contexts, but neither pro- vides a clear example of a Zahavian handicap. Two key complications arise in applying the handicap hypothesis to marketing: (1) financial costliness does not carry a penalty of the same form or magnitude as evolutionary costliness, and (2) high advertising budgets do not functionally render the signal more reliable, although they may be perceived as such by viewers. The very fact that high advertising expenditures are perceived as more reliable signs of quality by potential consumers (Kirmani and Wright 1989), in spite of the differences between financial and evolutionary costliness, underscores the usefulness of understanding signaling theory within business contexts. True handicap signals should be exceedingly rare in business contexts due to loss aversion by business owners and shareholders. The exorbitant costs associated with handicap signaling, along with the severe and survival-threatening risks of signaling when the business is not truly equipped to bear the cost of that signal, discourage the use of handicaps in commercial enter- prises. Certain forms of money-back guarantees, particularly those for high-cost products and where consumers can return a product due to dissatisfaction rather than proof of a physical defect, may represent a legitimate handicap business signal in that the financial cost may be too great for businesses with products of insuffi- cient quality to bear and remain solvent. However, most money-back guarantees are either for lower-cost products, where customers may be less inclined to spend the opportunity cost to obtain a refund, or require that the customer show substantial The Role for Signaling Theory and Receiver Psychology in Marketing 233 evidence of a defect, as with lemon laws for new vehicle purchases. These limited money-back guarantees, in contrast to satisfaction guarantees for high-cost goods, are insufficiently costly as signals to constitute a true handicap. The possession of an honors degree from a highly esteemed university provides a potential employer with an expensive testament to the applicant’s quality (Spence 1973). Earning such a degree reflects intelligence, conscientiousness, and the base resources to have been adequately prepared for college and then to have been able to afford its cost. According to Frank (2007), attorneys drive cars that signal competence and past successes to their current or prospective clients. This induces lawyers to spend ever more money to maintain their status, resulting in a signaling arms race of BMWs and Mercedes. The most successful lawyers end up with the most expensive cars, although many less successful lawyers may have spent disproportionately in order to ensure future work. Chemistry professors, in contrast, have no career-based incentive to signal success by ever more expensive automo- biles, as their variance in salary is lower than that of attorneys and the granting institutions and deans that determine those salaries are rarely aware of which cars professors drive. The disproportionately nice cars driven by real estate agents may also serve a similar signaling function in providing the agents with an opportunity to display their own extended phenotype. Homebuyers might then transfer luxuri- ous qualities about the realtor’s car to the property, even though these two entities are largely independent of each other. Organic certification serves as a costly signal of a particular set of food production criteria, which is itself associated with ecological consciousness and health-related concerns. The process of becoming certified as an organic food producer is time-consuming, financially costly, and bureaucratically tangled. Due to the onerous nature of the process, many small producers with sustainable practices opt out of formal certification. Large-scale organic agribusiness, which must follow the letter of organic certification but not necessarily the spirit, is a lucrative industry that convincingly signals certain information about food production to consumers that are disconnected from a more immediate interaction with the producer. Under certain circumstances, signals that are not costly can nonetheless be reliably honest. Minimal cost signals may be evolutionarily stable where senders and receivers rank their preferences for outcomes in the same order, where dishonest signaling is punished, where senders and receivers have overriding common inter- ests, where senders would not benefit by signaling falsely, or where they solve coordination problems between individuals that expect repeated interactions (Maynard Smith and Harper 2003). Within the business realm, low-cost signals could be functional when corporations anticipate ongoing professional relationships, where failures affect both parties equally, and generally where the relationship between entities is highly cooperative. Within the animal kingdom, an obscure but illustrative example of a minimal cost signal comes from the mating behavior of Drosophila subobscura. When approached by a new male, a mated female extrudes her oviposi- tor to signal that she has already been inseminated. The male then ceases what would otherwise be a lengthy courtship display. Both parties have an interest in the cessation of unsuccessful courtship, and by use of this minimal cost signal, the 234 B. Dunham female communicates sufficient information for the common interest to be recog- nized and for the male to move on to a more receptive potential mate (Maynard Smith 1956). Some forms of commitment signaling in human courtship consist of minimal cost signals, such as wearing a romantic partner’s fraternity pin or letter jacket. This form of signaling carries a low strategic cost for both the donor and donee of the object but conveys salient information about the relationship to outside parties. In these examples, a woman will visibly wear an article that her suitor likely already owned independently of their relationship. This form of signaling in court- ship contrasts somewhat with the costs entailed in engagement rings worn by women and wedding rings worn by both parties in a relationship. These rings are intrinsi- cally linked to the courtship itself, having been purchased or handed down within a family to commemorate that particular relationship, and do generally involve some degree of cost in their purchase, although this cost is highly variable (see Cronk and Dunham 2007 for a discussion of the signaling value of engagement rings). Minimal cost signals aren’t particularly attention grabbing, either for receivers or for academics working on signaling topics. Nonetheless, they represent a signifi- cant category within signaling theory and are relevant for marketers precisely because of their low cost in an evolutionary sense. Few business signals should be expected to be truly costly, in the sense of imposing such an undue burden that a dishonestly signaling business would be exterminated by the market, simply because the cost involved in transmitting the signal could be devoted to other business expenses. Furthermore, boards of directors and stockholders would rarely be expected to idly approve of such risky endeavors. Success in business industries is rarely as “all or nothing” as it is in biological signaling systems, such as mating and evasion of predators. One business example of a minimal cost signal is the near ubiquitous grocery or department store posting that guide dogs are permitted. This signal in stores that otherwise have no-pet policies is advantageous to store owners and managers for three key reasons, even though the primary beneficiaries of such policies are blind individuals and seeing-eye dogs who cannot read the signs. The first reason is that this decreases the possibility that a customer who does not immediately recognize an animal in the store as a guide animal will mistakenly assume that the anti-pet policy is not actively enforced. The second is to reassure individuals who would presume that an absolute prohibition against all animals would be discriminatory (Frank 2007). The third, not addressed by Frank, is that not all individuals with service animals are themselves blind, as guide animals may be used to help people with a range of different disabilities. In all of these cases, the costs of presenting the signal are minimal and the benefits, while small, are great enough to offset the very low cost. As such, minimal cost signals in business contexts do not “handicap” the signaler and may be of particular use to marketers due to their low risk profiles and palatability to stockholders. Exploring the routes to reliability with minimal cost signals, particularly in regards to emphasizing con- fluences of interests between businesses and consumers, will allow marketers to craft minimal cost signals tailored specifically to the aims of a particularly com- pany. Investments in local social programs, such as hosting book drives or donating day-old pastries to a soup kitchen, constitute a straightforward minimal cost signal The Role for Signaling Theory and Receiver Psychology in Marketing 235 that individual businesses or franchises could undertake to signal their community involvement and shared sense of purpose to consumers; tasteful promotion of these activities by marketers could enhance the stature of the business to a larger consumer base. Other minimal cost signals may be more appropriate for other marketing aims or within different industries. Beyond its intuitive applicability to marketing and advertising, signaling theory may help interpret interactions in other business contexts. Market share repurchases, where corporations buy back their own shares on the stock market or from individ- ual shareholders to increase the company’s equity, are potential opportunities for companies to signal their confidence in their own value and their belief that the current market price is below the true value. Firms that frequently repurchase their own shares are larger, have a more stable operating budget, and tend to pay higher dividends (Jagannathan and Stephens 2003). Firms that announce open market share repurchases but then do not actually themselves repurchase the shares tend to be smaller and to attract less attention from analysts than do firms that follow through with repurchases (Bhattacharya and Dittmar 2008). In this manner, firms’ willing- ness to announce and to follow through with repurchases may transmit signals to current stockholders, potential stockholders, and consumers of the firms’ products. Another opportunity for signaling in a non-marketing business context is orga- nizational citizenship behavior within companies. Salamon Deutsch and Deutsch (2006) argue that organizational citizenship behavior, wherein employees perform tasks beyond their job descriptions for the benefit of the company and their cow- orkers, represents a handicap signal to convey the senders’ underlying competitive qualities and skills. However, organizational citizenship behavior is relatively easy to fake in comparison to the sorts of handicap signals seen in biological systems. Individuals could sacrifice time and energy that they could otherwise spend outside of work. Furthermore, the penalty for insufficient signaling is likely not so severe as to cause a risk to survival in the corporate environment. It may be more instructive to consider organizational citizenship behavior as a signal of variable costliness that conveys commitment to the corporation. Organizational citizenship behavior may not give as much information about the intrinsic qualities of the workers, including their job skills, as it does about their high valuation of the company and willingness to personally sacrifice for the benefit of the team. In markets where actors know each other and have an expectation of future interaction, as between firms and contractors, reputational effects may accrue from dishonest communication (Phalen 1998). Thus signals may be expected to be honest, even in the absence of efficacy or strategic costs in the production of that signal, because the penalty for dishonest signaling is so punitive as to be prohibitive. 3.2 Identity Costliness is only one route to signal reliability, although it is the one most frequently examined by researchers studying biological signaling phenomena. 236 B. Dunham If signals can influence the behavior of other individuals, why don’t people signal falsely to induce the desired response? In addition to the constraints on signal honesty due to cost, potential for punishment, and lack of benefit for dishonest signaling, certain signals can be honest due to an intrinsic link to the quality represented and sheer impossibility to be faked, in contrast to an exorbitant cost that would render attempts to falsely signal foolhardy, yet technically possible. Cues and indices provide reliable transmissions of information to receivers due to these immutable connections. Cues are defined very broadly as any animate or inanimate feature that can be used by an organism to inform and guide future action (Hasson 1994; Maynard Smith and Harper 2003). This distinguishes cues from signals, as signals can be activated and de-activated, whereas cues are fixed at a point in time (Maynard Smith and Harper 2003). The crucial distinction between signals and cues is that signals evolved due to their effect on others and cues did not. Specifically, signals evolved because they influenced the knowledge of receivers about senders, even at a cost to the senders’ somatic fitness. Cues, in contrast, do not entail a somatic cost, may not be heritable, may evolve due to natural selection rather than the effect on the receiver, and may be maintained despite offering receivers more information than is necessarily in the best interest of senders (Hasson 1997). Cues are, therefore, linked to the quality being perceived by an observer in a more direct and unfakeable manner than are signals. As cues are intrinsic, unfakeable, and offer few opportu- nities to bias consumer behavior to the benefit of the business entity, their applica- tions should be relatively rare in marketing contexts but cues should be highly attended to and perceived as reliable by consumers. The following examples of cues in biological and business contexts may clarify cues as a side note to signaling phenomena. An animal example of a cue is the weight difference in funnel-web spiders, which determines whether an interloper will instigate or retreat from a contest (Reichert 1978; Maynard Smith and Harper 2003). The act of vibrating the web is an index, but the size difference itself did not evolve due to receiver psychology and is fixed at a specific point in time. In women, facial masculinity may serve as a cue of sexual attitudes and behavior due to the underlying association of both with testosterone (Boothroyd et al. 2008; Campbell et al. 2009). This cue did not evolve to serve the purposes of the sender; indeed, it may be contrary to the information that a woman would prefer to convey and is relatively fixed at one point in time; in fact, women may attempt to circumvent the cue by use of cosmetics (Cronk et al. 2003). Within a business context, the crowdedness of a parking lot or dining room is a cue to potential customers of the popularity, and by extension the quality, of an establishment. It is a feature of the environment that conveys information about the establishment to passersby. Management may attempt to circumvent the parking lot cue by asking staff to park directly by the entrance rather than reserving the prime parking spaces for customers, but it is rather difficult to convincingly fake the crowded dining room cue by placing mannequins in seats. Other business applica- tions of cues are mandatory guidelines for listing nutritional information on foods, posting health department ratings in restaurants, and providing OHSA information The Role for Signaling Theory and Receiver Psychology in Marketing 237 on chemicals or other hazardous materials in workplace environments. These cues, as they cannot legally or logistically be faked by business owners who might benefit by transmitting a different message, are reliable due to the direct information content of the cue. Indices are unfakeable because they are causally dependent upon the trait being signaled (Maynard Smith and Harper 2003). Unlike cues, indices are signals that organisms actively produce and from which they accrue benefits; they are not passive and cannot be neutral or negative as cues may be. Unlike handicaps and other costly signals, they have no strategic costs. The stotting of Thomson’s gazelles provides a clear illustration of an index (Caro 1986; Fitzgibbon and Fanshawe 1988). Upon spying a cheetah or predatory canine, a fit gazelle will leap repeatedly in place, displaying his awareness that a predator is in the vicinity. Stotting, in effect, lets the predator know that that particular gazelle is prepared to flee and that perhaps another gazelle would make a more vulnerable meal. Colla- borative human music and dance performances may signal important information to members of the group and to outside parties. In particular, the degree of successful collaboration may signal the strength of the social coalition to outgroup members and smooth the way for intergroup encounters (Hagan and Bryant 2003). In this manner, group cohesiveness in musical performance is an index of group social cohesiveness; it is unfakeable, linked to identity, and has no particular strategic cost for its production although it carries an efficacy cost of learning and performing the selection. Local agricultural status, as evidenced through participation in producers-only farmers’ markets or through signage at a third party retail grocer, may serve as an index of local production. Local production is itself highly desirable to a subset of consumers due to its associations with ecological consciousness, sustainable prac- tices, and support of small-scale local businesses. Indeed, purchases of ecologically conscious products may serve as a signal of altruism towards the planet and its inhabitants, and thus can be motivated by status-enhancing primes (Griskevicius et al. 2010). A growing interest in sustainable eating and in supporting local farmers has contributed to the popularity of farmers’ markets and in supermarket signage to note the provenance of wares. Some farmers’ markets allow resale of produce grown far away, but producers-only farmers’ markets self-evidently limit vending space to producers within convenient driving distance. As such, consumers have a reasonable assurance that the food was produced locally. Many vendors increase consumer confidence in their business ideology by providing information about their farm or dairy, ranging from distributing literature to displaying pictures to inviting visitors to the farms. These low-cost marketing materials signal to custo- mers that the vendors are ideologically attractive, in the sense of representing small family businesses, practicing sustainable farming techniques, limiting the use of certain materials in food production, or some combination of these. Some signals may be maladaptive or inefficient, although these should generally be limited over time due to negative selection pressures; cues, however, can remain stable over time despite possible disadvantages to senders. Signals from marketers may contradict the foundational message of their product. Miller (2009) provides 238 B. Dunham the “right hand ring” advertisement series from the DeBeers diamond cartel as an example of this. At a minimum, an engagement ring, diamond or otherwise, signals the intentions of a woman and her suitor to wed. Differences in the proportional costs of engagement rings indicate that they also signal information about male and female mate value, as well as features of the courtship (Cronk and Dunham 2007). Miller (2009) argues that the emergence of single, successful women buying ornate diamond rings to wear on their right hands, wrapped up in an advertising campaign that appeals simultaneously to notions of empowerment and entitlement, under- mines the base functional signal of engagement rings as a marker of betrothed status. If observers do indeed cease to differentiate between right and left hand rings, this marketing campaign may have undermined DeBeers’s own best interest by lessening the signaling prominence of diamond engagement rings. Table 1 reviews and defines each signal type, the strategic cost associated with producing the signal, a nonhuman example, a human example from a non-business context, and a human example from a business context. 4 The Role of Sensory Bias and Receiver Psychology in Signal Design, and How This Matters for Marketers The appeal to receiver psychology, through either manipulating evolved preferences or by reducing skepticism, is the crux of signaling theory. Much of signaling focuses on exploiting the sensory and psychological biases of receivers rather than on convincing those receivers of a signal’s honesty (Enquist and Arak 1998; Guilford 1997; Ryan 1998). Examining signal design from the standpoint of receiver psychology facilitates explanations that are not contingent upon sheer costliness but rather focus upon exploitation of innate or evolved preferences, such as those for symmetry (van Valen 1962), neoteny (Hinde and Barden 1985), and the color red (Adams and Osgood 1973). Within the business realm, attention to evolved prefer- ences that capitalize upon sensory bias can guide both product design and marketing efforts (Saad 2006). Presenting signal messages that appeal to the receiver psychol- ogy of consumers and that serve as an inducement to buy represents the second major challenge facing marketers from an evolutionary psychological perspective. Precisely because so many signals used in marketing can be faked, due to the low costs in an evolutionary sense of dishonest signaling and the rarity of truly unfake- able cues and indices, appeals to receiver psychology through the five senses may equip marketers with tools derived from evolutionary psychology to better position products and attract consumers. 4.1 Sight and Sound: The Obvious Targets The available advertising venues in Western society are particularly amenable to pitches that exploit the senses of sight and sound (see Saad 2004 for a discussion of 